Title: New Guidelines for Hypertension Diagnosis and Treatment: An European Perspective
Source: PubMed Central
PMCID: PMC11263159
License: CC BY 4.0

------------------------------------------------------------

New Guidelines for Hypertension Diagnosis and Treatment: An European Perspective

Historically, essential hypertension represents one of the first clinical  conditions for which diagnostic and therapeutic clinical guidelines have been  developed. The first official guidelines paper dates back to 1977 when the Joint  National Committee in the United States released the document, which was  revised few years later in a new paper jointly issued by an “ad hoc” Committee  of the World Health Organization (WHO) in conjunction with the International  Society of Hypertension (ISH). During the last decade of the XX century  updated versions of the guidelines document have been prepared by the previously  mentioned organizations in collaboration with American scientific societies. The  first guidelines document prepared by European Societies dates back to 2003, when  the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) together with the European Society of  Cardiology jointly signed the european guidelines document. Revised editions  followed in 2007, 2013 and 2018, the latter being the most cited paper in  the worldwide medical literature.

The new guidelines document, released during the 32nd European Meeting on  Hypertension held in Milan in 2023 and published in the Journal of Hypertension  , has been developed by the task force members appointed by the ESH and  revised by external reviewers. This editorial will be aimed at briefly discussing  the main elements of novelty of the document, whose recommendations are based on  three levels of evidence, i.e., those deriving from data collected in randomized  clinical trial or meta-analyses (evidence A), in non-randomized clinical trial  (evidence B) or in small clinical studies (evidence C).

As in the previous editions ESH Guidelines pay close attention to the clinical  value of the different office and out-of-office blood pressure (BP) measurements  available in daily clinical practice, namely clinic, home and 24 hour ambulatory  values. The “gold-standard” parameter in the diagnostic process of a  hypertensive state still remains clinic BP, based on the evidence collected in  epidemiological and in controlled intervention trials performed since the early  seventies which allowed to define with sphygmomanometric values the relationships  between BP and clinical events and their reduction associated with  antihypertensive drug treatment (level of evidence A). Guidelines, however,  strongly support a wider use of BP measurements obtained outside the clinical  environment, i.e., out-of-office, maintaining the same threshods as the 2018  documents. 2023 ESH guidelines document emphasizes the clinical relevance  of these out-of-office measurements which are more reproducible and display a  greater prognostic value than office BP. Additionally, ambulatory BP allows to  detect different clinical hypertensive phenotypes, such as white-coat  hypertension, masked hypertension, uncontrolled and controlled high blood  pressure, non-dipping, dipping or reverse dipping hypertension, orthostatic  hypertension, nighttime hypertension and early morning BP surge. The  procedure would also allow to provide information on two additional hemodynamic  variables of high clinical and prognostic and clinical relevance, namely BP  variability during daytime and nighttime periods and the behaviour of the  corresponding heart rate values. Guidelines also emphasize the potential new  interest for BP measurement by the patient at his/her home based on the evidence  that the approach would allow to counteract one of the barrier to BP control,  i.e., poor adherence to antihypertensive drug treatment. Finally, the new  guidelines incorporate automated (unattended) BP measurement in the physician’s  office. As the document remarks, unattended BP measurement is linked to BP  values lower than those obtained by conventional office BP measurement and is  likely dependent on the lack of the so-called alerting reaction to the doctor’s  BP measurement which may lead, throughout a marked sympathetically-mediated  vasocostriction, to a transient visit-related BP elevation.

Guidelines, while confirming the relevance for cardiovascular risk  stratification of classic risk factors (age, gender, smoking, overweight,  obesity, hyperuricemia, elevated heart rate, etc.), add novel variables such as  low birth weight, adverse outcomes of pregnancy such as preterm delivery,  gestational hypertension and prediabetes, frailty of the older hypertensive  patient, impact on BP of the migration processes and environmental exposure to  air pollution and traffic noise. ESH guidelines, however, emphasize the need  to perform, at any patient’s age, risk stratification of the hypertensive  patient on the presence of associated clinical conditions (diabetes, heart  failure, miocardial infarction, stroke, renal insufficency) and asymptomatic  target organ damage. The latter includes several measurements, based on their  undisputable predictive value for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, large  availability and cost (electrocardiography, echocardiography, carotid  ultrasonography, pulse wave velocity estimated creatinine clearance or glomerular  filtration rate through standardized formulae, serum creatinine and  microalbuminuria) (level of evidence A). The 2023 guidelines recommend organ  damage to be searched in different organs because of the evidence that multiple  organ damage carries a worse prognosis than damage limited to a single organ.  They also recommend organ damage to be assessed before and during treatment  because data are available that treatment-induced regression of left ventricular  hypertrophy and proteinuria reduction are associated with a smaller incidence of  cardiovascular events, thereby offering physician and patients an insight on  whether the treatment adopted is providing protection (level of evidence A)  .

New European guidelines confirm clinic BP values amounting to 140/90 mmHg as  those above which the therapeutic intervention is needed, with the goal to  achieve during treatment values close to 130/80 mmHg. An exception is represented  by older patients, in which BP tresholds are 160/90 mmHg and BP goals not below  the value of 130/80 mmHg or, better, 135/85 mmHg. To achieve the above mentioned  BP goal, along with life-style interventions, all 5 classes of  antihypertenisve drugs (diuretics, ACE-inhibitors, calcium antagonists,  beta-blockers and angiotensin II receptor antagonists) can be used (level of  evidence A). Thus, at variance from the previous guidelines, the 2023  document fully restores the therapeutic role of beta-blocking agents in  hypertension treatment, based on the evidence obtained in the context of clinical  trials and meta-analyses.

Fixed low-dose combination drug therapy represents the first choice to start  treatment (level of evidence A). This intervention, according to the  recommendations of the guidelines, allows an adequate blood pressure control to  be obtained in a short time period, optimizing the patient’s adherence profile to  therapy with the use of a reduced pharmacological dosage. The observation made in  several clinical intervention studies that adherence to therapy is greater in  treatment schemes that include fixed low-dose combination therapy as the first  therapeutic step is the ground for this recommendation. The therapeutic  choice of the pharmacological association to be followed in the individual  patient depends on a number of factors, including the presence of comorbidities,  organ damage, patient’s age and metabolic profile, as well as on the detection of  a more or less severe global cardiovascular risk profile.

Three other novel aspects of the guidelines document deserve a brief comment.  First in the 2023 document the evidences on the clinical usefulness of renal  nerves ablation are classified as level of evidence A. This is based on the  positive results of recent trials which, by using sophisticated devices to  perform bilateral renal denervation, have shown in resistant hypertenive state  small but significant ambulatory and office BP reductions, even when the results  were adjusted for those obtained in the placebo-control group. Guidelines  however, emphasize the need to consider the procedure only in selected clinical  conditions, such as in difficult to control and in drug-resistant hypertension,  thereby not supporting a wider and generalized use of the approach in a larger  fraction of the hypertensive phenotypes.

The second aspect of the guidelines refers to the procedures to be adopted for  patients follow-up. A new consideration introduced in these guidelines is the key  role of nurses and pharmacists in the long-term treatment of high BP. These  professionals have an important role to play in patient instruction, support, and  follow-up as part of a general strategy to improve BP control and achieve better  adherence to treatment. As far as the timetable of the follow-up, guidelines  recommend a regular scheme of visits, to be performed every 3 months initilly and  subsequently every year. Optimal adherence to therapeutic intervention, effective  BP control and possibly regression of target organ damage represent the goals of  the follow-up intervention.

Finally guidelines fully encourage the systematic use in the years to come of  the telemedicine appraoch, by allowing to obtain a better adherence of the  hypertensive patients to the antihypertensive treatment, thus improving BP  control.

In this commentary on the new ESH guidelines on hypertension, the attempt has  been made to highlight the most important novelties in the document, which is  even more extensive than the 2018 edition. Main novelties are multiple and  include, amomg others, thersholds and targets of the BP lowering intervention,  the early use of combination drug treatment with the aim of improving adherence,  BP control and ultimately cardiovascular protection. A larger use of new  cardiovascular drugs, such ad sodium glucose transporter-2 inhibitors (SGLT2  inhibitors) and angiotensin receptor neprylisin inhibitors (ARNI), will hopefully  allow in the next future to help doctor to achieve this goal.

Publisher’s Note: IMR Press stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author Contributions

The single author was responsible for the conception of ideas presented, writing, and the entire preparation of this manuscript.

Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate

Not applicable.

Funding

This research received no external funding.

Conflict of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest. Guido Grassi is serving as one of the Editorial Board members of this journal. We declare that Guido Grassi had no  involvement in the peer review of this article and has no access to information regarding its peer review. Full responsibility for the editorial process for this article was delegated to Giuseppe Boriani.

References

Report of the Joint National Committee on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. A cooperative study

1999 World Health Organization-International Society of Hypertension Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension. Guidelines Subcommittee

2003 European Society of Hypertension-European Society of Cardiology guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension

2007 Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension: the task force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC)

2013 ESH/ESC Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension: the Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC)

2018 ESC/ESH Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension

2023 ESH Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension The Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension: Endorsed by the International Society of Hypertension (ISH) and the European Renal Association (ERA)

Future treatments in hypertension: Can we meet the unmet needs of patients

Sympathetic Neural Mechanisms Underlying Attended and Unattended Blood Pressure Measurement

Cardiovascular implications in adolescent and young adult hypertension

Phenotyping the hypertensive heart

Physical activity and hypertension

Research strategies in treatment of hypertension: value of retrospective real-life data

Individualized Beta-Blocker Treatment for High Blood Pressure Dictated by Medical Comorbidities: Indications Beyond the 2018 European Society of Cardiology/European Society of Hypertension Guidelines

Catheter-Based Renal Denervation: 9-Year Follow-Up Data on Safety and Blood Pressure Reduction in Patients With Resistant Hypertension

10-Year Outcomes of Catheter-Based Renal Denervation in Patients With Resistant Hypertension

Telemedicine and Digital Medicine in the Clinical Management of Hypertension and Hypertension-Related Cardiovascular Diseases: A Position Paper of the Italian Society of Arterial Hypertension (SIIA)